Middle East Technical University Rules and Regulations Governing Undergraduate Studies
PART I
Aim, Scope, Basis and Definitions of Terms
 
Aim
ARTICLE 1 – (1) The aim of this document is to regulate the procedures and principles for student admissions and registration to the undergraduate programs offered at Middle East Technical University, and the conduct of undergraduate education, examinations, and assessment.
 
Scope
ARTICLE 2 – (1) This document comprises the provisions concerning student admissions and registration to the undergraduate programs offered at Middle East Technical University, and the conduct of undergraduate education, examinations and assessment.
 
Basis
ARTICLE 3 – (1) This document has been drawn up based on article Articles 14, 43, 44 and 46 of the Higher Education Act 2547 dated 4 November 1981.
 
Definitions of Terms
ARTICLE 4 – (1) Wherever the following terms appear in this document, they shall be taken to refer to:
a) The concerned faculty board: Middle East Technical University faculty boards
b) The concerned administrative board: Middle East Technical University faculty administrative boards
c) EPE: Middle East Technical University School of Foreign Languages English Proficiency Exam
d) Undergraduate program: a higher education program consisting of a minimum of eight semesters
e) The RO: Middle East Technical University Registrar’s Office
f) The President: President of Middle East Technical University
g) The Senate: Middle East Technical University Senate
h) DBE: Middle East Technical University Department of Basic English
i) International joint-degree program: an undergraduate program jointly carried out with an institution of higher education abroad 
j) The University/METU: Middle East Technical University
k) The University Administrative Board: Middle East Technical University Administrative Board.
l) SFL: Middle East Technical University School of Foreign Languages
m) Regulation: Middle East Technical University Rules and Regulations Governing Undergraduate Studies
 
PART II
The Principles Concerning Education
 
Medium of Instruction
ARTICLE 5 – (1) The medium of instruction in METU’s undergraduate programs is English. Yet, courses that are to be conducted in Turkish or any other language are determined by the Senate.
 (2) Students are registered to the undergraduate programs after their proficiency in English is documented.
 (3) The assessment of the English proficiency level of students placed in, admitted or transferred from another institution to undergraduate programs, and the education at the DBE Preparatory Class are conducted in accordance with the provisions of Middle East Technical University School of Foreign Languages Department of Basic English Regulations for DBE Preparatory Class.
 
Duration of Education
ARTICLE 6 – (1) The duration of a program is four years (eight semesters), and this duration is five years (ten semesters) for programs offering a master’s degree along with an undergraduate degree.  
(2) The maximum duration of an undergraduate program is seven years (fourteen semesters), and this duration is nine years (sixteen semesters) for programs offering a master’s degree along with an undergraduate degree.   
(3) The period of study which is spent at the DBE is not included in the normal and maximum durations of study.
(4) The semesters for which students are granted a leave of absence by the concerned administrative board are not included in the normal and maximum durations of study.
(5) All the semesters during which the students have been registered since they first enrolled in an undergraduate program or which have been spent unregistered due to failure to re-register are included in the normal and maximum durations of study.
(6) The semesters which have been spent in institutions of higher education in the country or abroad as part of student exchange programs are included in the normal and maximum durations of study.
 
Academic year
ARTICLE 7 – (1) One academic year consists of two 16-week semesters including the final examination periods.
(2) Summer School may be offered within an academic year. The principles regarding the conduct of education in Summer School are determined by the Senate.
(3) The duration and dates of the registration, courses, examinations and other similar activities within an academic year are arranged through the academic calendar. 
(4) The weekly course schedules within a semester and summer school are prepared and announced by the concerned department chairs in coordination with the RO. 
(5) The courses to be offered in a semester and Summer School are determined by the concerned department chairs and approved by the concerned administrative boards. The course sections, capacities and criteria are determined by the concerned department chairs.
 
An undergraduate program
ARTICLE 8 – (1) An undergraduate program is drawn up by the concerned department(s), and offered by recommendation of the concerned faculty board, decision of the Senate and approval by the Higher Education Council.  
(2) The curriculum of an undergraduate program comprises the distribution among semesters of studies such as course work, laboratory work, practical work, workshop(s), studio work, practical training.
(3) The changes to the title and duration of an undergraduate program are drawn up by the concerned department, and determined / resolved by the Senate by recommendation of the concerned faculty board.   
(4) The amendments to the curriculum of an undergraduate program and the guidelines for the adaptation of students to these are prepared by the concerned department and resolved by the concerned faculty board.     
 
An international joint-degree program
ARTICLE 9 – (1) International joint-undergraduate degree programs may be offered in collaboration with institutions of higher education abroad.
(2) The principles governing international joint-undergraduate degree programs are determined by the Senate.     
 
A double major program
ARTICLE 10 – (1) Students enrolled in an undergraduate program at METU may concurrently enroll in another undergraduate program. The second undergraduate program is called a “Double Major Undergraduate Program”. The students who complete this program are awarded a “Double Major Diploma” in addition to the diploma they receive from the undergraduate program in which they are enrolled. The principles governing the double major programs are determined by the Senate.
 
A minor program
ARTICLE 11 – (1) Students enrolled in an undergraduate program at METU may additionally enroll in a “Minor Program” which incorporates a certain number of courses offered by another undergraduate program at METU, or a certain number of interdisciplinary courses. A minor program is not an undergraduate program. The students who complete this program receive a certificate. The principles governing minor programs are determined by the Senate.
 
Exchange programs
ARTICLE 12 – (1) Within the framework of mutual agreements, exchange programs may be arranged between METU and institutions of higher education within the country or abroad. The principles governing such programs are determined by the Senate.  
 
Certificate program
ARTICLE 13 – (1) The principles concerning certificate programs are determined by the Senate.
 
Special students
ARTICLE 14 – (1) Special students are students who are not enrolled in any program at METU, but who are expected to fulfill the requirements of the limited number of courses they are registered to. The principles governing these programs are determined by the Senate. 
 
Admission to undergraduate programs
ARTICLE 15 – (1) Admission to undergraduate programs is carried out in accordance with the principles determined by the Senate within the framework of the Higher Education Act 2547 dated 04 November 1981 and of the regulations and decisions of the Higher Education Council.
(2) The principles governing applications to quotas for students from, and their admission and registration procedures are determined by the Senate.
(3) The principles governing applications for external or internal transfers, and their admission and registration procedures are determined by the Senate.
 
Initial enrollment
ARTICLE 16 – (1) The registration of students placed in or admitted to undergraduate programs is carried out by the RO on the dates indicated in the academic calendar.
(2) The below-mentioned requirements are sought for the finalization of student enrollment to the university:
a) Holding a document certifying that the student is qualified to receive a diploma from a high school in Turkey, or a school within Turkey or abroad whose equivalence to a high school is recognized by the Ministry of Education.
b) Fulfilling the provisions related to tuition and education fees.
c) For international students, fulfilling the requirements for a student visa.
d) Fulfilling other requirements as announced by the University.
(3) Only the originals of the documents required for registration, or their approved copies upon presentation of the originals to the University are accepted. Regarding compulsory military service and judicial records, the application is processed based on the candidate’s declaration. In case students who have earned the right for registration with false or misleading declarations and documents are detected, they will not be registered. If they have already been registered, the registration will be cancelled regardless of the semester they are in. All documents issued to them, including diplomas, will be declared null and void, and legal action will be taken against them. Those in this position are deemed not to have earned a student status and cannot enjoy any rights granted to students in the future.
 (4) Students who have completed their registration procedures are provided with a student ID card. The ID cards contain the students’ personal information.
(5) Those who fail to complete their registration within the declared period are deemed to have waived their student rights and thereafter may not claim any rights.
 
Courses and Course Credits
ARTICLE 17 – (1) The courses within undergraduate programs are of two types: compulsory and elective. Compulsory courses are those that are specified in the curriculum and  must be taken. Elective courses are courses whose numbers and types are specified in the curriculum and are selected by students.
(2) The course titles, codes, contents, credits, categories, prerequisites, co-requisites, midterm exams, final exams and other similar features and amendments to be made to these features are determined by recommendation of the concerned department and the decision of the concerned administrative board.
 (3) Pre-requisite and co- requisite courses may be specified in order for a course to be taken.
a) A course to be taken prior to another course and in which at least the letter grade DD or S is to be earned is called the pre-requisite of that course.
b) A course which must be taken together with another course in the same semester is called the co-requisite of that course. The co-requisite requirement is deemed fulfilled in the event that a letter grade (excluding the letter grades NA and W) has been previously obtained in a co-requisite course.
(4) Apart from the pre-requisite and co-requisite courses, additional requirements may be specified by the department chairs in order for a course to be taken.
(5) In case of exemption from the pre-requisite or co-requisite course of any course, the pre-requisite or co-requisite requirement of that course is deemed fulfilled.
(6) The credit value of a course consists of all of its weekly theoretical course hours plus half of the weekly hours of laboratory, practical applications, studio, practical training and other similar work related to that course. 
 (7) Weekly theoretical and practical course hours of non-credit courses are specified; however, a credit value is not allocated for such courses. 
 
Course Load
ARTICLE 18 – (1) The normal course load of a program is the number of credit courses in the semester where the highest number of credit courses exist in the curriculum of that program.
 (2) A student’s course load in a semester is limited to the normal course load. The normal course load:
a) may be increased by only one course upon the students’ request and with the approval of the advisor, if their Cumulative Grade Point Average is at least 2.00. 
b) may be increased by up to 2 courses at most upon the students’ request and with the approval of the advisor, if their Cumulative Grade Point Average is at least 2.50. 
 (3) The minimum course load of students in a semester is three credit courses. In justifiable situations, this load may be reduced with the approvals of the advisor and the chair of the concerned department.
(4) For students who are able to fulfill the requirements for graduation at the end of the registered semester, the minimum course load provision is not sought. 
 
Counting courses towards an undergraduate program
ARTICLE 19 – (1) The procedures for counting the courses taken in any institution of higher education towards the program the student is enrolled in are carried out by the concerned faculty administrative board upon recommendation of the concerned department chair.
(2) The procedures for counting courses are carried out according to the current curriculum.
(3) In course counting procedures, which of the courses with the grades CC and above, S or with equivalent grades are to be counted towards the program is determined. 
(4) The semester(s) spent are calculated according to the courses counted towards the program and are deducted from the students maximum duration. In this procedure, the normal course load of the concerned program is taken into consideration as corresponding to one semester.
(5) Other principles related to counting courses are determined by the Senate.
 
 Extra-curricular courses
ARTICLE 20 – (1) Extra-curricular courses are credit courses that do not exist in the curriculum of the undergraduate, or double-major/minor program a student is enrolled in, but which the student additionally takes. The following rules apply for extra-curricular courses:
a) Such courses are taken in the NI (not included) status.
b) The courses taken in the NI status are counted towards the course load of the student in the related semester.
c) Maximum two courses may be taken in NI status per semester.
d) The status of courses falling into the NI status cannot be altered after the registration process of the concerned semester is completed.
e) The status of courses cannot be rendered NI after the registration process of the concerned semester is completed. 
f) Courses taken in NI status may be repeated only once in the same status.
g) Courses taken in the NI status are not included in Grade Point Average calculations.
h) The courses taken in NI status are indicated in the transcript along with the earned letter grade.
i) A course taken in NI status cannot be counted towards the program or programs in which the student is enrolled within the semester it is taken.
 
Semester registrations
ARTICLE 21 – (1) Students are liable to re-register each semester on the online registration dates indicated in the academic calendar. However, in their initial enrollment to an undergraduate program, students may also register in the add/drop week indicated in the academic calendar. Students who fail to register on the designated dates are deemed unregistered and may not enjoy the rights of registered students.  
(2) Semester registration procedures consist of the following phases:
a) Payment of the tuition or education fee and fulfilment of any other financial obligation (dormitory fee, library fee, etc.) pertaining to previous years, if any.
b) On-line registration for courses.
c) Obtaining approval for the online semester registration following a one-on-one meeting with the advisor.
(3) Students must register for all the courses in the curriculum of the concerned semester excluding courses they are exempt from.
(4) The following priorities are observed in determining the courses to be taken during semester registrations provided that the pre-requisites requirements are met. However, these priorities may be changed with the approval of the academic advisor.
a) Courses which must be repeated.
b) Courses pertaining to previous years but which were not taken.
c) Courses which must be taken in accordance with class order in the curriculum, courses students want to take in order to increase their grade and/or in NI status.   
 (5) Students who have completed their semester registration during the online registration period may add or drop courses or change course sections during the add/drop period stated in the academic calendar. Advisor approval is required in order for the changes to be valid.
(6) Among students who fall into the unregistered status, those who wish to register for a semester must apply to the chair of the concerned department by stating and documenting a valid reason before the termination of the designated add/drop period for that semester. The student whose excuse is accepted by the concerned administrative board and who meets the requirements for the semester registration is re-registered by the RO.
 (7) Students who fall into the unregistered status may register for ensuing semesters on dates indicated for the online registrations in the academic calendar. These students must submit a petition to the RO latest by the date online registrations start.
(8) The status of students who have not renewed their registration in four consecutive academic years (eight semesters) is terminated with the decision of the concerned faculty executive board and approval of the Council of Higher Education.
 
Course withdrawal
ARTICLE 22 – (1) Students may withdraw from courses they are enrolled in according to the following rules:
a) Course withdrawal is processed within the tenth week of the concerned semester.
b) Course withdrawals are processed and advisor approvals are given online.
c) An advisor approval is given following a one-on-one meeting with the advisor.
d) Information is given to the instructor of the course online.
e) Course withdrawal may be processed for only one course in a semester.
f) Course withdrawal may be processed for maximum six courses throughout the duration of education.
g) Course withdrawal is not possible in the first two semesters of the curriculum.
h) Course withdrawal is not possible for repeated courses, previously withdrawn courses, courses in NI status or non-credit courses.
i) Course withdrawal is not allowed for students taking the minimum course load or below in a semester. 
 
PART III
Examinations, Assessment and Graduation
 
Attendance and Examinations
ARTICLE 23 – (1) Students must attend the theoretical and practical class hours, examinations and other academic studies as required by the instructors. 
(2) The attendance records of students are kept by the instructors.
(3) The effect of student attendance on the right to take mid-term and final examinations and on the letter grades for a semester; mid-term examinations, homework assignments, practical applications and other similar studies for which the students are responsible and the effect of these on the letter grades for a semester; the requirements to take the final examination, if any, are determined by the instructors and announced to the students in the course schedule at the beginning of the semester.     
(4) At least one mid-term examination and one final examination are given for each course. The courses which do not require a mid-term and/or final examination are determined by the department concerned and the RO is informed of these.
(5) Students are informed of their success in each course within a semester by the instructor of that course. While doing so, instructors follow the principle of privacy of personal information.
(6) The examination dates of the courses for which mid-term examinations are given are determined by the instructors offering the course, or by department chairs upon the recommendation of the course instructors. Mid-term dates are announced within the first four weeks of a semester. In compulsory multi-section courses offered for different undergraduate programs, the examination dates are determined and announced by the concerned department chairs in coordination with the RO.   
(7) All exams other than mid-term and final examinations may be administered with no predetermined date. 
(8) In courses for which final examinations are given, the arrangement of the final exams is made as follows:
a) The dates and times of the final examinations are determined and announced by the RO following opinions received from the concerned departments.
b) The pre-announced final examination dates may be changed by the RO upon the justified request of the concerned department provided that the new dates are within the period of final examinations. This procedure is carried out before the period of final examinations starts.  
(9) If deemed necessary, courses and exams may be held after weekly working hours and/or on Saturdays and Sundays. 
(10) The concerned instructors and proctors are responsible for the administration of the exams in accordance with the rules.
 (11) The principles regarding the procedures to be applied for students who have failed to sit an examination are determined by the instructor offering the course, or department chairs by recommendation of the concerned instructors. 
 
Assessment and Grades
ARTICLE 24 – (1) Students are given a letter grade for each course at the end of the semester they are registered.
(2) This letter grade is at the discretion of the instructor offering the course.
(3) In determining the letter grade, the students’ mid-term and final examination grades, their success in their studies within the semester and their attendance during course and practical work are taken into consideration.     
(4) The courses for which an exemption exam is to be administered, the requirements for exemption and the implementation principles are determined by the Senate upon the recommendation of the concerned faculty board.
(5) The coefficients of the letter grades, the score intervals used in the calculation of Grade Point Average and the standings related to success are indicated below:  
a)
Letter Grade	Coefficient	Score intervals
AA	4,00	90-l00
BA	3,50	85-89
BB	3,00	80-84
CB	2,50	75-79
CC	2,00	70-74
DC	1,50	65-69
DD	1,00	60-64
FD	0,50	50-59
FF	0,00	0-49
NA	0,00	*
 
Letter Grade	 
Standing	 
S	Successful	 
U	Unsuccessful	 
EX	Exempt	 
I	Incomplete	 
W	Withdrawn	 
 
b)  The grade NA is designated due to one of the conditions below. The grade NA is processed as FF in the calculation of the Grade Point Average.
1) Not fulfilling the attendance requirements for the theoretical and practical course hours as indicated in the course schedule.
2) Not qualifying to take the final exam due to failure in fulfilling the provisions regarding course practices.  
3) Having taken none of the mid-term and final examinations.
(c) Grades which are not included in the Grade Point Average are as follows:
1) The grade S (satisfactory) is designated to students who are successful in non-credit courses 
2) The grade U (unsatisfactory) is designated to students who are not successful in non-credit courses. 
3) The grade EX (exempt) is designated to students who have been exempted from certain courses in the curriculum.  
4) The grade I (incomplete) is designated to students who are not able to complete the course requirements by the end of the semester or the summer school for a reason found valid by the course instructor. The grade “I” must be converted to a letter grade within a week from the last day of grade submissions for the semester or summer school. In special cases, however, this period may be extended latest until the date registrations start for the following semester, when it must be converted to a letter grade. These special procedures are conducted by recommendation of the department chair offering the course and the approval of the concerned administrative board. In case of failure to convert the grade “I” to a letter grade within the required period, the grade “I” will be automatically converted to the grade “FF” or “U”. The dates concerning the letter grade “I” are indicated in the academic calendar.(*)
5) The grade W (Withdrawn) is designated to students who withdraw from a course.
 
Submission and announcement of grades and grade corrections
ARTICLE 25 – (1) Final grades for the semester are submitted by course instructors on the dates stated in the academic calendar.
(2) Letter grades are made accessible to students at the related Internet address on the date indicated in the academic calendar.
(3) Any errors in grading are corrected with the approval of the concerned department chair upon the course instructor’s application for correction within a week from the last day for the submission of semester or summer school final grades. In cases where this period is exceeded, the correction of errors must be made by recommendation of the chair of the department which offers the course and the approval of the concerned administrative board. The dates concerning grade corrections are indicated in the academic calendar.
 
Repeating a course
ARTICLE 26 – (1) Courses for which the letter grades FF, FD, NA, U, W have been earned must be repeated.
(2) Other elective courses within the framework of the curriculum may be taken instead of those which are to be repeated on condition that these courses fall into the same category / type and are approved by the advisor.
(3) Courses from which the letter grade DD or above has been earned may be repeated within the three consecutive semesters following the semester in which the courses were taken. This provision is not applicable to students in probation, and those who have passed all their courses for graduation but do not have the required GPA.
(4) The grade earned in the repeated course is valid regardless of the previous grade.
 
Grade Point Averages
ARTICLE 27 – (1) Students’ semester Grade Point Averages and Cumulative Grade Point Averages are calculated at the end of each semester and their standing related to success is determined.  
(2) The total credit points obtained from a course are calculated by multiplying the credit value of the course and the coefficient corresponding to the letter grade earned from the course at the end of the semester.
(3) The Semester Grade Point Average is calculated through the division of the total credit points obtained from all the courses the student has taken in the concerned semester by the total credit values of those courses. 
(4) The Cumulative Grade Point Average is calculated through the division of  the total credit points obtained from all the courses the student has taken up to that time, the semester concerned inclusive, by the total credit values of those courses.   
(5) The Grade Point Averages obtained in these calculations are expressed by rounding them off to the second digit after the decimal point. In rounding the numbers off, the second digit after decimal point does not change if the third digit is smaller than 5, but it increases by 0.01 if the third digit is 5 or greater.
 
Successful students
ARTICLE 28 – (1) Students whose Cumulative and Semester Grade Point Averages are at least 2.00 and who have not earned the letter grades FF, FD, NA or U in the concerned semester are qualified as follows according to their Semester Grade Point Averages:   
a) Of the students who are within their maximum period of study and  who have taken at least three credit courses in the semester concerned, those whose Semester Grade Point Averages are 3,50 – 4,00 are qualified as High Honor Students, and those whose Semester Grade Point Averages are  3,00 – 3,49 are qualified as Honor Students. Students who fulfill the Grade Point Average requirement but who fail to fulfill the requirement for three credit courses are considered Satisfactory in their standing.   
b) Students who are within their maximum period of study and whose Semester Grade Point Averages are 2,00 – 2,99,  or students who have exceeded the maximum period of study and whose Semester Grade Point Averages are at least 2,00 are considered Satisfactory in their standing.  
(2) Students whose Cumulative Grade Point Averages and Semester Grade Point Averages are at least 2,00 but who have earned the letter grade FF, FD, NA or U in any course in the semester concerned are considered Sufficient in their standing.
 
Unsuccessful students
ARTICLE 29 – (1) Students whose Cumulative Grade Point Averages and/or semester Grade Point Averages are below 2,00 are considered Unsatisfactory in their standing.
 
Probation students
ARTICLE 30 – (1) Students whose Cumulative Grade Point Averages are below2,00 in two consecutive semesters are qualified as Probation students.
(2) Probation students may not enroll in the courses which they have not previously taken, or from which they have earned the letter grade W. These students must first repeat the courses they have previously taken, primarily those which they have earned the letter grades FF, FD, NA, U.
(3) Probation students may enroll in other elective courses within the framework of the curriculum instead of those which are to be repeated on condition that these courses fall into the same category / type and are approved by the advisor. Conditions which require justification are evaluated by the concerned faculty administrative board by recommendation of the concerned department chair.
 (4) The minimum course load requirement is not valid for probation students. 
 (5) The CGPA must be at least 2.00 for the probation status to end.  
 
Graduation requirements and the graduation date
ARTICLE 31 – (1) The following requirements must be fulfilled in order to be eligible for graduation from an undergraduate program:
a) All the courses included in the curriculum must be completed with at least the letter grades DD or S.
b) The Cumulative Grade Point Average must be at least 2,00.
c) With the exception of the international joint undergraduate-degree programs conducted with contracted universities abroad, students are required to have obtained at least half of the total credit points of the curriculum from the courses offered at METU.
d) With the exception exchange programs and international joint undergraduate-degree programs conducted with the contracted universities abroad, the last two semesters must be spent at METU on registered status.
(2) The date of graduation from undergraduate programs is determined as follows:
a) In undergraduate programs, the graduation date is the announcement date of the letter grades for the concerned semester or Summer School as indicated in the academic calendar. For those who graduate after the announcement of grades as a result of the correction of an erroneous grade, the conversion of the grade “I” to a letter grade, or by exercising the right for a make-up, the graduation date is the date on which the letter grade is finalized.
b) For students who wish to leave the university by receiving an Associate Degree Diploma before becoming eligible for graduation from an undergraduate program, the graduation date is the announcement date of the letter grades for the semester in which the student has obtained the right to receive an Associate Degree Diploma. 
 
Resit examinations
ARTICLE 32 – (1) The principles regarding resit examinations are determined by the Senate.
 
Procedures to be carried out at the end of the maximum duration of the study
ARTICLE 33 –  (1) Actions to be taken regarding the students who cannot fulfill the graduation requirements at the end of the maximum duration of study are carried out according to the procedures and principles determined by the Senate in line with paragraph (c) of the Article 44 of the Law on Higher Education No. 2547."
 
Diplomas, certificates, and other documents
ARTICLE 34 – (1) Diplomas, certificates awarded and other documents issued to students, and the provisions regarding the issuance of these are as follows:
a) Undergraduate Diploma: This diploma is awarded to students who meet the graduation requirements of an undergraduate program.
b) Double Major Diploma:  This diploma is awarded to students who are deemed eligible for an undergraduate diploma and who also meet the graduation requirements of the double major program they are registered in. 
c) Associate Degree Diploma: This diploma is awarded to students who wish to leave the University before being entitled to graduation provided that they apply for it and complete the registration cancellation procedures. In order to qualify for an Associate Degree Diploma, students must have earned the letter grades of at least DD or S in all the courses in the curriculums of the first four semesters, and their Cumulative Grade Point Averages must be at least 2,00.  
d) Provisional Certificate of Graduation: This document is issued only once as a substitute for a diploma to students who are deemed eligible for graduation, and it is valid until the date of the commencement ceremony of the concerned academic year.
e) Diploma Supplement: This is a document accompanying diplomas which aims at the international recognition of the academic and professional competences of its holder.
f) Certificate of High Graduation Achievement: This is a certificate which is awarded to high ranking graduates in undergraduate programs. The principles regarding the rank ordering of such students are determined by the Senate.
g) Minor Program Certificate: This certificate is awarded to students who are deemed eligible for an undergraduate diploma and who also successfully complete the minor program they are registered in. This certificate is not a diploma.
h) Transcript: This document is a complete official record of the courses taken each semester, their credit values and the grades earned, the grade point averages for the concerned semesters, the cumulative grade point averages and the standing of a student starting from the student’s admission to the university. 
i) Semester Success Certificate: This is a document given to “Honors” or “High Honors” students at the end of a semester.
j) Student Certificate: This is a document which shows the University registration status of a student.
(2) Diplomas, certificates and other such documents are signed by the below-mentioned authorities:
a) Associate degree, undergraduate degree, double-major degree diplomas and minor certificates are signed by the President and the concerned Deans and the Heads of Departments. 
b) Provisional certificate of graduation is signed by the concerned Department Chair and authorized RO staff. 
c) Certificates of High Achievement and Semester Success Certificates are signed by the President.  
d) Diploma supplements, transcripts and student certificates are signed by authorized RO staff.    
(3) The faculties, departments and programs of students are indicated on the diplomas, certificates and other documents.
(4) Students who complete undergraduate and/or double major programs with Grade Point Averages of 3,00 – 3,49 are qualified as “Honors” and those with Grade Point Averages of 3,50 or  above are qualified as “High Honors” graduates. These qualifications are stated on the diplomas. 
(5) The format, size and information to be written on diplomas are specified by the Senate.
(6) In the event of the loss of a diploma, a replacement copy is issued once only. The replacement copy bears the annotation “second copy”.
(7) In the event of a change in the name and/or surname of the graduate after the graduation date, replacement copies of diplomas and/or certificates are not issued, nor is the information on them changed.
 
PART IV
Advisorship, Disciplinary Procedures, Student Grants, Health Service, Tuition fees, Student Leave, Registration Cancellation and Student Notifications
 
ARTICLE 35 – (1) Department chairs assign an academic advisor from among full time faculty to each student registered in an undergraduate program.
(2) The duties/responsibilities of the academic advisors are stated below:
a) They inform the students about the courses they are to take each semester and provide guidance in choosing them.
b) They approve semester registrations after evaluating the courses to be taken with the student according to her/his academic standing.
c) They provide information and guidance to the student in adapting to university life, professional development and career choices. 
 
Disciplinary Procedures
ARTICLE 36 – (1) The disciplinary procedures regarding students are carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Rules and Regulations Governing the Disciplinary Procedures in Institutions of Higher Education published in the Official Gazette No. 28388 dated 18 August 2012. (*)
 
Student grants and aids
ARTICLE 37 – (1) The provisions governing the distribution of student grants and aids obtained from various sources are determined by the Senate.
 
Health service
ARTICLE 38 – (1) The provisions governing the health services offered to students are determined by the Senate.
 
Tuition and other fees
ARTICLE 39 – (1) Tuitions, education fees other fees are determined by the University Administrative Board within the framework of the Presidential Decision.   
 
Leaves of absence
ARTICLE 40 – (1)
Students may be granted leaves of absence from the University for a maximum period four semesters, and without exceeding two consecutive semesters each time, with the decision of the concerned administrative board based on obligations related to health, military service, education in an institution of higher education in Turkey or abroad, or financial and familial obligations.
(2) Students who wish to be granted a leave of absence must apply to the chair of the concerned department with a petition stating valid grounds for the request and the necessary documents latest by the end of the add-drop week of the related semester. However, no time restrictions exist for application in the event that the grounds for permission arise after the end of the add-drop week.
 (3) If the date of a student's petition for a leave of absence is before the deadline of the interactive registrations for the relevant semester, the student is not required to have completed their course registration, paid the tuition fee, and received approval from their advisor while applying for leave. If the date of a student's petition for a leave of absence is after the deadline of the interactive registrations for the relevant semester but within the add-drop period, the student is required to have completed their course registration, paid the tuition fee, and received approval from their advisor with no issues; otherwise, the student is not listed as a registered student and thus cannot be permitted leave. In order for a student to apply for a leave of absence after the add-drop period for the relevant semester ends, they must be listed as a registered student.
(4) The concerned administrative board sends their decision to the RO, which processes the decision and notifies the student and the concerned academic and administrative units.
 (5) Students who wish to return to University earlier than the termination of the leave period must apply with a petition to the concerned department  chair before interactive registrations start. The application is resolved with the decision of the concerned administrative board upon the opinion of the student’s advisor and recommendation of the department chair, and it is sent to the RO.
 
Registration Cancellation
ARTICLE 41 – (1) Students who wish so may cancel their registration by applying to the RO.
(2) Students who cancel their registration or are dismissed on any grounds must follow the procedures for registration cancellation specified by the university and fulfill their financial obligations (tuition or education fee, dormitory fee, library debt, etc.) in order that they may receive their personal documents in the RO files.
(3) Students who cancel their registration in an undergraduate program by receiving an Associate Degree Diploma or due to failing to fulfill the graduation requirements forfeit all their rights in the university and may never again enroll in the program they have cancelled their registration. 
 
Notifications
ARTICLE 42 – (1) All types of notification are sent to the students’ postal address in the official records or to the e-mail addresses provided to them by the University. 
(2) Students are obliged to follow the messages sent to the e-mail address provided by the University.
 
PART V
Miscellaneous and Final Provisions
 
Northern Cyprus Campus
ARTICLE 43 – (1) The procedures and principles regarding the implementation of these rules and regulations in the undergraduate programs carried out at the Northern Cyprus Campus are determined by the Senate.
 
Invalidated Regulation
ARTICLE 44 – (1) The regulation entitled Middle East Technical University Rules and Regulations Governing Undergraduate Studies published in the Official Gazette no. 28387 dated August 17, 2012, has been invalidated. 
 
Provisions Governing the Transition Period
TEMPORARY ARTICLE– (1)  In determining the maximum duration mentioned in articles 6 and 33 in this bylaw for students who earned the right to register to undergraduate programs in the first semester of the 2014-2015 academic year or earlier, the second semester of the 2014-2015 academic year is considered the starting point.
 
Validity
ARTICLE 45 – (1) This regulation is effective as of the date of its publication in the Official Gazette and is to be implemented as of the beginning of the 2021-2022 academic year.
 
Implementation
ARTICLE 46 – (1) The provisions of this regulation are implemented by the President of Middle East Technical University.

Middle East Technical University Rules and Regulations Governing Graduate Studies
PART 1
Aim, Scope, Basis and Definition of Terms
 
Aim
ARTICLE 1 – (1) The aim of this document is to regulate the procedures and principles regarding admissions and registration to the programs offered by the graduate schools of Middle East Technical University and the conduct of graduate education, examinations and assessment.
 
Scope
ARTICLE 2 – (1) This document comprises the regulations concerning admissions and registration to the graduate programs offered b Middle East Technical University and those governing the conduct of graduate education, examinations and assessment. 
 
Basis
ARTICLE 3 – (1) This document has been drawn up based on article 14 of the Higher Education Act 2547 dated November 4, 1981. 
 
Definition of Terms
ARTICLE 4 – (1) Wherever the following terms appear in this document, they shall be taken to refer to:
a) Academic staff: Faculty and instructors,
b)  ALES: Academic Personnel and Graduate Education Exam,
c) CEDS: Comprehensive Examination for Doctoral Students,
d) Concerned GSB: Graduate school boards of Middle East Technical University,   
e) Concerned GSAB: The graduate school administrative boards of Middle East Technical University,
f)  ECTS: European Credit Transfer System,
g)  EPE: Middle East Technical University School of Foreign Languages English Proficiency Exam,
h) Faculty: Full-time academic staff holding a title of Assistant Professor and higher,
i) GSD: A department under a graduate school,
j) GS Chair: The chair of a department under a graduate school,
k) GS: Graduate schools affiliated to the university,
l) GMAT: The international Graduate Management Admission Test,
m)   Graduate program: Master’s Programs (with a thesis or without a thesis) and Doctoral programs,
n) GRE: The international Graduate Record Examinations,
0) HEC: Higher Education Council.
p)  International joint graduate program: A graduate program jointly conducted with an institution of higher education abroad,
q) IUC: Inter-university Council of Turkey,
r)  Maximum duration: Two academic semesters for academic deficiency programs, three academic semesters for Master’s programs without a thesis, six academic semesters for Master’s programs with a thesis, twelve academic semesters for Doctoral programs, fourteen academic semesters for Ph.D. on Bachelor’s degree programs,
s) Plagiarism: the practice of knowingly or unknowingly taking and using someone else’s work, ideas, methods or data without crediting the source, and presenting them as one’s own,
t) President: The President of Middle East Technical University,
u)  Program duration: Two academic semesters for academic deficiency programs, two academic semesters for non-thesis Master’s programs, four academic semesters for Master’s programs with a thesis, eight academic semesters for Doctoral, ten academic semesters for Ph.D. on Bachelor’s degree programs,
v) RO: The Directorate of Middle East Technical University Registrar’s Office,
w) Senate: The Senate of Middle East Technical University,
x) SFL: Middle East Technical University School of Foreign Languages,
y) TAC: A thesis advisory committee,
z) University (METU): Middle East Technical University,
aa) University Administrative Board: Middle East Technical University Administrative Board,
 
PART 2
Provisions Concerning the Conduct of Graduate Education
 
Medium of Instruction and Foreign Language Proficiency
ARTICLE 5 – (1) The medium of instruction in METU’s graduate programs is English. Courses that are to be conducted in Turkish or any other language are determined by the Senate.
 (2) In order to apply to graduate programs, candidates have to document their proficiency in English. The candidates’ English proficiency is assessed through EPE. Scores obtained from international language exams whose equivalences have been determined by the Senate may also be used to this end.
(3) English proficiency documentation is not required from nationals of countries whose official language is English and who have graduated from an English-medium institute of higher education.
 (4) Candidates registered to a graduate program at METU for at least one semester within the past four semesters as of the date of their application to a graduate program are not required to document their proficiency in English provided that they hold the score determined by the GSD they are applying to.
 (5) The validity period of EPE scores and scores obtained from exams deemed equivalent by the Senate is the period designated by the institution that owns the exam. This period of validity should not have been exceeded on the date of application to a graduate program. A document which is valid on the date of application will remain valid on the date of registration.
 
Period of education
ARTICLE 6 – (1) The normal and maximum periods of study for graduate programs are effective as described in the related articles of this regulation.
(2) The period spent in the academic deficiency program is not included in the maximum period of study of the program.
(3) Semesters for which students have been granted a leave of absence by the concerned administrative board are not included in the normal, maximum and additional periods of study. 
(4) Semesters which have been spent in institutions of higher education within the country or abroad as part of student exchange programs and international joint programs are included in the normal, maximum and additional periods of study.
 (5) All the semesters during which the students have been registered since they first enrolled in a graduate program or which have been spent unregistered due to failure to re-register are included in the normal, maximum and additional periods of study.
(6) Students may graduate in a shorter period of time provided that they meet all the requirements for graduation determined by the concerned GSD.
 
Academic year
ARTICLE 7 – (1) One academic year comprises two semesters each of which is minimum sixteen weeks, including the period for final exams.
(2) Summer School may be offered within an academic year. The principles regarding the conduct of education in Summer School are determined by the Senate.
(3) The duration and dates of registration, courses, examinations and other similar activities within an academic year are indicated in the academic calendar.
(4) The weekly course schedules within a semester and during Summer School are prepared and announced by the concerned GSD chair under the coordination of the RO.
(5) The courses to be offered during a semester and Summer School are specified by the concerned GSD chair and approved by the concerned administrative board. The sections, capacities and criteria of these courses are determined by the concerned GSD chair.
 
Graduate education
ARTICLE 8 – (1) Graduate education encompasses Masters with or without a thesis, Doctoral, and Ph.D. on Bachelor’s degree programs.
 (2) A non-thesis Master’s program can also be offered in a second track program.
 (3) A graduate program is drawn up by the concerned GSD. It is offered after its recommendation to the Senate by the concerned GSB, its approval by the Senate and the issuance of consent by the HEC.
 (4) The curriculum of a graduate program comprises studies such as course work, laboratory and applied work, workshops, studios, practicum, seminars and thesis work and the distribution of these throughout the academic semesters.
 (5) The changes to the title of a graduate program are made after preparation by the concerned GSD, decision of the Senate following the recommendation of the concerned GSB, and approval by the HEC.
 (6) The amendments to the curriculum of a graduate program and the guidelines for the adjustment of students to these are arranged by the concerned GSD and set by the concerned GSB. 
 
National and International graduate joint-degree programs
ARTICLE 9 – (1) Graduate joint-degree programs may be offered with institutions of higher education within the country or abroad.
(2) Education in such programs is carried out within the framework of the provisions of the concerned Regulation of HEC.
 
Exchange students
ARTICLE 10 – (1) Exchange programs may be offered between METU campuses and institutions of higher education in the country or abroad within the framework of mutual agreements. The regulations governing these programs are determined by the Senate.
 
Special students
ARTICLE 11 – (1) Special students are students who are not registered to any program at METU, but who are expected to fulfill the requirements of the limited number of courses they are registered to. The regulations governing these programs are determined by the Senate. 
 
Application and admission to graduate programs
ARTICLE 12 – (1) Student applications and admissions to graduate programs are carried out in accordance with the principles set by the Senate.
 (2) At the end of each semester, each GSD recommends, to the GS they are affiliated to, the provisions regarding applications (EPE, ALES etc.) for the following semester. These recommendations are assessed and resolved by the concerned GSAB and are announced on the official website of the concerned GS and/or GSD.
 (3) Applications to graduate programs are made to the concerned GS Directorates within the period announced in the academic calendar.
(4) Applicants to graduate programs are to fulfill all the requirements specified and announced by the concerned GSD.
 (5) Students who have applied to and earned the right for registration to a program with false or misleading declarations and documents will not be registered and legal action will be taken against them.
 (6) Candidates who have completed or are in their final semester of their undergraduate studies may apply to Masters’ with or without a thesis or to Ph.D. on Bachelor’s degree programs, whereas candidates applying to Ph.D. programs are required to have completed or be in their final semester of their graduate studies.
(7) In order to be eligible for application, candidates are to hold an ALES score determined by the GSD which is no lower than the base score specified in the Graduate Education Regulation published in the Official Gazette no. 29690 dated April 20, 2016. In order to be eligible for application to Master’s without a thesis, the requirement for holding an ALES score is determined by the concerned GSD. 
(8) A recent ALES score is not required from those who dropped out or graduated from any graduate program, but are applying to a program once again after a one-semester lapse, provided that they hold an ALES score which is no lower than that announced by the GSD they are applying to.
(9) Instead of an ALES score, candidates may submit a score obtained on an international exam (such as GRE or GMAT) whose equivalence has been announced by the concerned GSD. If conditions regarding the ALES score have not been announced by the concerned GSD, a score obtained on an international exam equivalent to the base ALES score as announced by the HEC may be submitted for application. 
(10)  The validity period of ALES scores or scores obtained on equivalent international exams is the period designated by the institution that owns the exam and is effective as of the date the candidate took the exam. The validity should not have expired on the date of application to a graduate program. A document which is valid on the date of application will remain valid on the date of registration.
 (11) For admission to a graduate program, along with the fulfillment of the general provisions, the candidate should be deemed satisfactory in the scientific evaluation carried out by the concerned GSD. Scientific evaluation may be carried out through such methods as a written and/or oral examination and/or an output portfolio.
(12) For admission to a graduate program, the weight of the ALES or equivalent exam score (provided that it is weighted at no less than 50% in the final mark) as well as the weights of such requirements as the scientific evaluation, EPE or equivalent international exam score, GPA (undergraduate and/or graduate), the letter of reference, and the letter of intent are determined by the concerned GSD.
(13) Admission of students is determined by the concerned GSAB by recommendation of the concerned GSD, and the application results of are announced by the concerned GS Directorate.
 
Special case student admissions
ARTICLE 13 – (1) The principles governing graduate program applications and admissions of candidates with foreign nationality and Turkish nationals who reside abroad are determined by the university Senate.
 
Student transfers between graduate programs
ARTICLE 14 – (1) Student transfers between graduate programs under the same GSD are made in accordance with the principles determined by the concerned GSB.
(2) Student transfers are not possible between graduate programs under different GSDs of the university or from a GSD of another institution of higher education.
(3) Student transfers cannot be made from Master’s without a thesis second track programs to regular Master’s programs.
 
The academic deficiency program
ARTICLE 15 – (1) The academic deficiency program is a program aiming at correcting the academic deficiencies of students and enabling them to adjust to the program they have applied to.
(2) Academic deficiency students are to follow an academic deficiency program comprising courses specified by the concerned GSD.
(3) An academic deficiency program that lasts for a maximum of two semesters may be recommended to students admitted to the program by the concerned GSAB by recommendation of the concerned GSD. This recommendation must be made at admission to a graduate program and all the academic deficiency courses that the student will take must be indicated on the Academic Deficiency Program Form. No changes may be made to the courses indicated on the form during the implementation of the program.
(4) The time spent in an academic deficiency program is a maximum of two semesters. Summer School is not included in this period. The time spent in an academic deficiency program is not included in the maximum duration for the concerned graduate program.
(5) The total amount of course credits in an academic deficiency program may not exceed eighteen credits.
(6) The provisions regarding the academic deficiency program are stated below:
a) An academic deficiency program for Master’s studies consists of undergraduate and/or graduate level courses. The credits of these courses are not included in the course load of the concerned graduate program.
b) An academic deficiency program for doctoral studies consists of undergraduate and/or MA/MS level courses and the credits of these courses are not included in the course load of the concerned doctoral program.
c) During an academic deficiency program, students may enroll in graduate courses with NI status by recommendation of the concerned GSD and approval of the concerned GSAB.
(7) For students to be deemed successful in an academic deficiency program and start their graduate studies, they must earn at least the letter grade CC in the undergraduate and CB in graduate courses they have taken and complete the program with a Cumulative Grade Point Average of minimum 2.50.  
 (8) The duration of an academic deficiency program may not be extended, excluding semester leaves of absence. Students who are not successful in the academic deficiency period are dismissed from the program.
 
Initial Enrollment to a program
ARTICLE 16 – (1) The registration of students admitted to graduate programs are conducted by the RO within the period specified in the academic calendar.
(2) The requirements listed below should be fulfilled for completion of enrollment of graduate program admissions:
a) Holding an undergraduate diploma for those admitted to Master’s with or without a thesis and Ph.D. on Bachelor’s degree programs, holding a Master’s diploma for those admitted to doctoral programs.
b) For international students, not having a student visa problem.
c) Fulfilling the provisions regarding tuition and education fees.
d) Fulfilling other requirements announced by the University.
(3) Originals of documents required for registration or their copies approved by the University upon presentation of the originals are accepted. Regarding compulsory military service and judicial records, the application is processed based on the candidate’s declaration. In case students who have earned the right for registration with false or misleading declarations and documents are detected, they will not be registered. If they have already been registered, the registration will be cancelled regardless of the semester they are in, all documents issued to them, including diplomas, will be declared null and void, and legal action will be taken against them. Those in this position are deemed not to have earned a student status and cannot enjoy any rights granted to students in the future.
(4) Students who have completed the registration procedures are provided with a student ID card. The ID cards contain personal information about students.
(5) Those who have not completed their registration within the announced period are deemed to have waived their student rights and thereafter cannot claim any of those rights.
 
Courses and course credits
ARTICLE 17 – (1) Courses within graduate programs are of two types: compulsory and elective. Compulsory courses are those that are defined in the curriculum and thus must be taken. Elective courses are those whose numbers, types and groups are defined in the curriculum and are selected by students.
(2) Course titles, codes, contents, credits, categories, prerequisites, co-requisites, midterm exams, final exams and other similar features and amendments to be made to these features are determined by recommendation of the concerned GSD and decision of the concerned GSB.
(3) Prerequisite and co-requisite courses may be specified so that a specific course might be taken. A course which must be taken and successfully completed before a specific course might be taken is called a prerequisite course, whereas a course which must be taken simultaneously with another course during the same semester is called the co-requisite course.
(4) In case of exemption from a prerequisite or co-requisite course, the student is deemed to have fulfilled the prerequisite or the co-requisite requirement(s) of the concerned course.
(5) Apart from prerequisite and co-requisite courses, some additional requirements may be specified by the concerned GSD so that a certain course might be taken.
(6) The credit value of a course consists of all of its weekly theoretical course hours plus half the weekly hours of laboratory, workshop, studio, practicum and other similar work related to that course.
 (7) The weekly theoretical and practicum hours of non-credit courses like seminars, fields of specialization, term projects and thesis work are specified; however, a credit value is not allocated for such courses. 
(8) At least one graduate course on the subjects of scientific research techniques and research and publication ethics must be taken during a graduate program. Regulations concerning such courses are drawn up by the concerned graduate school board.
 
Course substitution in graduate programs
ARTICLE 18 – (1) Substitution of the courses taken by students from another institution of higher education for courses in the graduate program they are currently enrolled in is made by the concerned GSAB by the recommendation of the concerned GSD.
(2) Course substitution is made in accordance with the current curriculum.
(3) The number of the exempted courses after course substitution cannot exceed 50% of the course load of the concerned graduate program.
(4) Except for the graduate courses taken with NI status, courses taken previously in another diploma program that the student has completed and/or courses taken simultaneously from two different graduate programs cannot be substituted in both programs. 
(5) The principles and provisions concerning course substitution are specified by the concerned GSAB.
 
Extra-curricular courses
ARTICLE 19 – (1) Extra-curricular courses are credit courses that do not exist in the graduate program a student is enrolled in, but which the student additionally takes. The regulations concerning such courses are stated below:
a) Such courses are considered in the status NI (not included in the Grade Point Average).
b) The status of courses falling into the NI status cannot be altered after the registration procedures of the concerned semester are completed.
c) Courses falling into the NI status cannot be substituted for courses in the program or programs the student is enrolled in during the semester they are taken.
d) Except for the courses that must be taken in the NI status in an academic deficiency program, the status of courses not taken in the NI status cannot be rendered NI after the registration procedures of the concerned semester are completed.
e) A course taken in the NI status can only be repeated in the same status.
f) Courses taken in the NI status are not included in Grade Point Average calculations.
g) Courses taken in the NI status are indicated in the transcript along with the earned letter grade. 
 
Semester registrations
ARTICLE 20 - (1) Each semester, students must re-register on the online registration dates indicated in the academic calendar. However, students who enroll in a graduate program for the first time may also register in the add/drop week indicated in the academic calendar. Students who fail to register on the designated dates are deemed unregistered and may not enjoy the rights of registered students.
(2) Semester registration procedures consist of the following phases:
a) The student pays the tuition or education fee and fulfills any other financial obligation (dormitory fee, library fee, etc.) pertaining to previous years, if any.
b) The student registers for the new semester.
c) The student meets her/his  advisor to obtain approval for the online semester registration.
 (3) Students who have completed their semester registration during the online registration period may add or drop courses or change course sections during the add/drop period indicated in the academic calendar. Advisor approval is required in order for the changes to be valid.
(4) Students who have been granted an additional period in any phase of the graduate program must re-register for the additional period.
(5) Among students who fall into the unregistered status during the normal period of study or maximum period of study, those who wish to register for a semester must apply to the chair of the concerned GSD by stating and documenting a valid reason before the termination of the designated add/drop period for that semester. The student whose excuse is accepted by the concerned GSAB and who meets the requirements for the semester registration is re-registered by the RO.
(6) Students who fall into the unregistered status may register for ensuing semesters on dates indicated for the online registrations in the academic calendar. However, these students must submit a petition to the RO latest by the date online registrations start.
(7) The semesters for which the student has failed to register are included in the normal and maximum periods of study. 
 
Course withdrawal
ARTICLE 21- (1) Graduate students cannot withdraw from courses.
 
PART 3
Examinations and Assessment
 
Attendance and examinations
ARTICLE 22 - (1) Students are to attend the courses, practical work, examinations and other academic studies as required by the instructors.
 (2) The attendance records of students regarding courses, practical work and similar studies are monitored by the instructor.
 (3) The contribution of student attendance, if applicable, to their eligibility to take mid-term and final examinations and their letter grade for the semester, the contribution of mid-term examinations, homework assignments, practical work and other similar studies for which the students are responsible to their letter grade for the semester, and if applicable, provisions for being eligible to take the final exam are determined by the instructor offering the course and all of these are announced to the students at the beginning of the semester.   
(4) At least one interim assessment such as a written examination, a project submission, a homework submission, an oral presentation is carried out for each course. The dates of such assessments are announced by the concerned instructor within the first month of the semester.
(5) Students are informed of their semester standing for each course by the concerned instructor. In issuing this information, the confidentiality regarding the personal information of students is protected.  
(6) In each course, at least one end-of-the-term assessment such as a written examination, a project submission, a homework submission, an oral presentation is done in each course. The regulations regarding final examinations are stated below:
a) In courses for which a final exam is given, the date and hour are specified and announced by the RO upon obtaining the opinion of the concerned GSD.
b) Announced examination dates may be changed by the RO based on the reasoned recommendation of the concerned GSD provided that they are within the period of final examinations for that semester. This change is made before the period of final examinations for that semester starts.
(7) A make-up opportunity is given to students who have not participated in the required assessment of any course such as taking a written examination, submitting a project or homework or making an oral presentation provided that their excuse is deemed valid by the concerned instructor.
(8) If deemed necessary, courses and exams may be held after weekly working hours and/or on Saturdays and Sundays. 
 
Assessment and grades
ARTICLE 23- (1) Students are assigned a letter grade for each course at the end of the semester they are registered.
(2) This letter grade is at the discretion of the instructor offering the course.
(3) In determining the letter grade, the students’ mid-term and final examination grades, their success in their studies within the semester and their attendance during course and practical work are taken into consideration.
(4) The coefficients of the letter grades and the score intervals used in the calculation of Grade Point Average are indicated below:  
a)
Letter Grade	Coefficient	Score intervals
AA	4.00	90-l00
BA	3.50	85-89
BB	3.00	80-84
CB	2.50	75-79
CC	2.00	70-74
DC	1.50	65-69
DD	1.00	60-64
FD	0.50	50-59
FF	0.00	0-49
NA	0.00	*
Letter Grade        Status
S                          Satisfactory
P                          Progressing
U                          Unsatisfactory
EX                       Exempt
I                           Incomplete                                   
b) The grade NA (not attended) is assigned by the instructor to students for one of the reasons stated below and is processed as FF in the calculation of Grade Point Average.
1) Not having fulfilled the requirements regarding attendance to theoretical and practicum hours specified in the course schedule.
2) Not being eligible to take the final exam due to not fulfilling the requirements regarding the course practices specified in the course schedule.  
3) Not having taken any of the midterm exam(s) or the final exam.
(5) Grades which are not included in the Grade Point Average are as follows:
a) The grade S (satisfactory) is assigned to students who are successful in non-credit courses and/or thesis work.
b) The grade U (unsatisfactory) is assigned to students who are not successful in non-credit courses and/or thesis work.
c) The grade P (progressing) is assigned to students who are successfully carrying on their non-credit courses and/or thesis work.
d) The grade EX (exempt) is assigned to students who have been exempted from certain courses in the curriculum. Principles regarding exemptions are determined by the Senate.
e) The grade I (incomplete) is assigned to students who are not able to complete the course requirements by the end of the semester or the summer school for a reason found valid by the course instructor. The grade “I” must be converted to a letter grade within a week from the last day of grade submissions for the semester or summer school. In special cases, however, this period may be extended latest until the date registrations start for the following semester, when it must be converted to a letter grade. These special procedures are conducted by recommendation of the chair of the GSD offering the course and the approval of the concerned GSAB.
f) In case of failure to convert the grade “I” to a letter grade within the required period, the grade “I” will be automatically converted to the grade “FF” or “U”. The dates concerning the letter grade “I” are indicated in the academic calendar. 
 
Submission and announcement of grades and grade corrections   
ARTICLE 24 – (1) Final grades for the semester are submitted by course instructors on the dates indicated in the academic calendar.
(2)  The grades are announced on the related Internet address to be opened to the access of students on the date indicated in the academic calendar.
(3) Any errors in grading are corrected with the approval of the concerned GSD chair upon the course instructor’s application for correction within a week from the last day for the submission of semester or summer school final grades. In cases where this period is exceeded, the correction of errors must be made by recommendation of the chair of the GSD which offers the course and the approval of the concerned GSAB. The dates concerning grade corrections are indicated in the academic calendar.
 
Success in a course and course repeats
ARTICLE 25 – (1) Provisions regarding success in a course and repeating a course are as follows:
a) In order to be deemed successful in a credit course, students are required to earn a minimum of a grade CC in a Master's program, and grade CB in a doctoral program.
b) In order to be considered successful in a non-credit course in graduate programs, students are required to receive the grade S.
c) Students are required to repeat a course that they have failed.
e) Students who have failed in a course or have not enrolled /could not enroll in a course indicated in the curriculum must take it the first semester it is offered. Courses within the framework of the curriculum and found appropriate by the advisor may replace elective courses that are to be repeated.
f) Students may repeat the course /courses in which they were successful in order to increase their Cumulative Grade Point Averages with the approval of the instructor offering the course. The grade earned in the repeated course is valid regardless of the previous grade.
 
Grade Point Averages
ARTICLE 26 – (1) Students’ semester Grade Point Averages and their Cumulative Grade Point Averages are calculated at the end of each semester and their standing related to success is determined.
(2) The total credit points obtained from a course are calculated by multiplying the credit value of the course and the coefficient corresponding to the letter grade earned from the course at the end of the semester. 
(3) The Semester Grade Point Average is calculated through the division of the total credit points obtained from all the courses the student has taken in the concerned semester by the total credit values of those courses.
(4) The Cumulative Grade Point Average is calculated through the division of  the total credit points obtained from all the courses the student has taken up to that time, the semester concerned inclusive, by the total credit values of those courses.
(5) The Grade Point Averages obtained in these calculations are expressed by rounding them off to the second digit after the decimal point. In rounding the numbers off, the second digit after the decimal point does not change if the third digit is smaller than 5, but it increases by 0.01 if the third digit is 5 or greater.
 
Student Dismissal
ARTICLE 27 – (1) Students  who fit any of the following descriptions are dismissed from the programs they are registered in:
(1) Students who are not successful at the end of the academic deficiency period;
(2) Students who cannot complete the course load specified by the GSD in four semesters in Master's with a thesis and doctoral programs, in three semesters in Master's without a thesis programs, or in six semesters in Ph.D. on Bachelor’s degree programs, and/or students whose Cumulative Grade Point Average is below 3.00 at the end of the period specified for taking courses in those programs   
(3) Students who receive the letter grade "U" twice consecutively or three times intermittently in their thesis work or related courses
(4) Students who fail the doctoral comprehensive exam twice
(5) Students who cannot successfully complete the courses that are specified by the Doctoral Comprehensive Examination Board and are taken in the NI status with a minimum letter grade of BB or better within the maximum duration  
(6) Students in doctoral degree programs whose thesis proposals have been rejected twice
(7) Students whose theses have been rejected  
(8) Students whose revised theses have been rejected 
(9) Students who have been deemed successful in thesis defense but have failed to submit the bound copies of their theses to the concerned Graduate School in one month from the date of thesis defense, or until the end of the additional period (of maximum one month) for submission granted by the concerned administrative board
(10) Students who cannot complete the program within maximum duration
 
Graduation requirements and dates
ARTICLE 28 – (1) The following requirements must be fulfilled in order to be eligible for graduation from a graduate program:
a) The success requirements indicated in the concerned provisions of this Regulation should have been fulfilled.
b) The final registered semester must be spent at METU, with the exception of international joint graduate degree programs conducted in collaboration with contracted universities abroad.
(2) The date of graduation from graduate programs is determined as follows:
a) In Master’s programs with a thesis, the graduation date is the date on which a signed copy of the the thesis is submitted to the concerned graduate school by examining committee.
b) In non-thesis Master’s programs, the graduation date is the announcement date of the letter grades for the concerned semester or Summer School as indicated in the academic calendar. For those who graduate as a result of the correction of an erroneous grade and/or the conversion of the grade “I” to a letter grade, the graduation date is the date on which the letter grade is finalized.
c) In doctoral programs, the graduation date is the date on which a signed copy of the the thesis is submitted to the concerned graduate school by examining committee.
 
Plagiarism
ARTICLE 29– (1) In order for a Master's or doctoral thesis to be defended before a thesis examining committee for the first time or at the end of the additional period granted by the committee, the following requirements should be fulfilled:
a) The report showing the similarity index of the thesis should be received by the thesis supervisor by running the thesis through plagiarism software.
b) The similarity percentage of the thesis should be smaller than the maximum similarity index set by the concerned administrative board.
c) The similarity index report should be distributed to the members of the thesis examining committee together with the thesis after the approval of the thesis supervisor.
(2) After the thesis work is completed,
a) the plagiarism report showing the final status of the Master's or doctoral thesis should be received and approved by the thesis supervisor,
b) the bound copies of the thesis should be submitted/presented to the concerned GS Chair,
c) the bound copies of the thesis should be approved by the concerned GS Chair and  presented to the concerned GS directorate for approval.
(3) In case of detection of plagiarism in a thesis, disciplinary action will be taken against the student according to the concerned articles of the Rules and Regulations Governing Disciplinary Procedures in Institutions of Higher Education published in the Official Gazette No. 28388 dated 18 August 2012.      
 
PART 4
Provisions Regarding Master’s Programs
 
Aim and scope
ARTICLE 30– (1) Master’s programs are conducted in two modes, namely, Master’s programs with a thesis and non- thesis Master’s programs.
(2) The aim of Master’s programs with a thesis is to have students access knowledge through scientific research, evaluate and interpret this knowledge and convert this acquisition into an academic product in the form of a thesis.
(3) The aim of non-thesis Master’s programs is to have students gain expert-level knowledge in the related field and the ability to use their existing knowledge in professional applications.
 
The duration of Master’s programs with a thesis
ARTICLE 31 – (1) The normal duration of a Master’s program with a thesis is four semesters, excluding the period spent in the Academic Deficiency Program. The maximum duration of the program is six semesters.
(2) In a Master’s program with a thesis, the maximum duration for the completion of credit courses and seminar courses is four semesters.
(3) In cases where the examining committee deems necessary, students whose work is found insufficient during their thesis defense may be granted an additional three months to enable them to complete their thesis work. 
 
Course loads and success in Master’s programs with a thesis
ARTICLE 32 – (1) The phases of a Master’s program with a thesis consist of at least seven credit courses with a cumulative minimum total of twenty-one credits, one seminar course, thesis work and the defense of the thesis before an examining committee, corresponding to a minimum total of 120 ECTS-credits.
(2) From the date a thesis supervisor is assigned, the student should register for thesis work or the related courses every semester.
(3) In Master’s programs with a thesis, courses coded 3XX and 4XX may be taken provided that they were not taken during undergraduate education. However, only two of these courses may be counted in the course load of the program.
(4) Students can take a maximum of two graduate courses offered in other institutions of higher education, by recommendation of the GSD and with the approval of the GSAB. 
If the courses taken are counted in the course load ofstudents in accordance with the decision of the Graduate School Administrative Committee, the grade of the relevant course is not included in the GPA of students and assigned as EX (exempt).
(5) Students who cannot successfully complete the courses (credit courses and seminar course) specified by the concerned GSD in a maximum of two academic years (four semesters), and/or students whose Cumulative Grade Point Average is below 3.00 are dismissed from their graduate program.  
 
Master’s thesis supervisor
ARTICLE 33 – (1) In a Master's program with a thesis, a thesis supervisor and a thesis topic specified by the student and the supervisor are recommended by the chair of the concerned GSD to the concerned GS latest by the end of the first semester. The thesis supervisor and the thesis topic are finalized after the approval of the concerned GSAB.
 (2) The thesis supervisor is selected from METU faculty.
 (3) In cases where the nature of the thesis work calls for more than one supervisor, a second supervisor may be assigned as co-supervisor by recommendation of the concerned GSD chair and approval of GSAB. The co-supervisor should be a faculty member of the University or a person from outside the University holding at least a Doctoral degree. 
 (4) Provisions concerning the assignment and replacement of a supervisor or a co-supervisor are determined by the concerned GSB. 
 
Preparation and finalization of a Master’s thesis
ARTICLE 34 – (1) The Master’s thesis comprises the phases of thesis work, and following this, its defense before of an examining committee.
 (2) Students are expected to successfully complete their thesis work within the maximum duration. At the end of that period, students who fail to attend the thesis defense session are dismissed from the programs they are registered in.
 (3) Students who receive the letter grade “U” twice consecutively, or three times intermittently in their thesis work or related courses within the maximum duration are deemed unsuccessful and are dismissed from their programs.
 (4) The student whose thesis work has been approved as successfully completed by the thesis supervisor must put her/his findings on paper in English in accordance with the principles indicated in the METU Thesis Manual. The provisions regarding thesis defense are as follows:
a) The student who has completed her/his thesis submits a copy to the thesis supervisor. The supervisor checks the thesis for plagiarism and writes a report on it. The plagiarism report, a copy of the unbound thesis and the thesis jury appointment form are then sent to the concerned GS with the approval of the GSD Chair latest one month before the meeting date of the committee.    
b) The latest date on which students may defend their thesis is indicated in the academic calendar for each semester.
c) The thesis jury is appointed by recommendation of the thesis advisor and the GSD chair and the approval of the concerned GSAB. The jury is composed of three or five members, one being the thesis supervisor of the student, and at least one being a faculty member from another university. If the jury is composed of three members, the co-supervisor cannot be a member of the jury. However, the co-supervisor can be a jury member if she/he is a faculty member and if the jury comprises five members.
d) The jury members convene within one month as of the date they receive the thesis to have the student defend it. The thesis defense, which must be conducted in English, comprises the presentation of the thesis work and the consecutive question and answer session, and is open to an audience.
e) The date and place of the thesis defense is announced on the official Web page of the concerned GSD.
(5) After the thesis defense is completed, the jury decides, in the absence of the audience and in absolute majority, whether the result is “approval”, “revision” or “refusal”. The concerned GS is notified of the decision of the jury latest within three days through an official exam report. The student whose thesis is not approved is dismissed from her/his program.
(6) Students who are asked to review their theses after the defense may be given an extension of maximum three months by the jury. The student makes the required revisions and defends the thesis once again before the same jury. At the end of this period, students who fail to stand before the jury for a defense, or whose thesis is not approved after the defense are dismissed from their programs.
(7) Within one month from the date of the defense, the student found successful in her/his thesis defense must submit to the concerned GS directorate, at least three bound copies of the thesis found appropriate as per format by the concerned GS, together with the plagiarism report. Upon the student's request, the submission deadline may be extended maximum one month by recommendation of the concerned GSD and with the approval of the concerned GSAB. Students who fail to meet these requirements cannot receive their diplomas until they do so, nor can they enjoy the rights granted to students. Such students are dismissed from their programs when their maximum period for study expires.
(8) A student whose official jury report has been submitted to the RO after being signed by the concerned GS director is entitled to a Master’s degree.
 (9) A student whose thesis has been rejected may be granted, upon her/his request and if the concerned GSD has a standard non-thesis Master's program, an additional one academic semester to complete the course and project load requirements of the program. If the student is also deemed unsuccessful at the end of that period, she/he is dismissed from the program.
 
The duration of a non-thesis Master’s program
ARTICLE 35 – (1) The duration of a non-thesis Master’s program is two academic semesters, excluding the period spent in the Academic Deficiency Program. The maximum duration is three academic semesters.
 
Course loads and success in non-thesis Master’s programs
ARTICLE 36 – (1) A non-thesis Master’s program consists of at least ten courses with a total of thirty credits, a Semester Project course and at least sixty ECTS-credits. The student must register for the semester project in the semester it is offered and submit a written report at the end of that semester. The semester project is a non-credit course, and is evaluated as "Successful" or "Unsuccessful".
(2) In non-thesis Master’s programs, courses coded 3XX and 4XX may be taken provided that they were not taken during undergraduate education. However, only two of these courses may be counted in the course load of the program. Furthermore, students can select a maximum of two graduate courses offered in other institutions of higher education, by recommendation of the GSD and with the approval of the GSAB. In second-track graduate programs without a thesis, taking courses outside the program is regulated by the University. 
If the courses taken are counted in the course load ofstudents in accordance with the decision of the Graduate School Administrative Committee, the grade of the relevant course is not included in the GPA of students and assigned as EX (exempt).
(3) A student who cannot successfully complete the course load (credit courses and the project course) specified by the GSD at the end of the three academic semesters, and/or whose Cumulative Grade Point Average is below 3.00 is dismissed from the program. 
(4) A student who successfully completes a non-thesis Master’s program with a Cumulative Grade Point Average of at least 3.00 in maximum three academic semesters is entitled to a Master’s degree without thesis.
 
Advisor assignment in non-thesis Master's programs
ARTICLE 37– (1) In the first semester a student enrolls in a non-thesis Master's program, either a faculty member or a member of the academic staff holding at least a doctoral degree is assigned as advisor for that student by the GSD for the purpose of course selection and advisor approval, and in the semester where the student is registered for semester project, for supervising the project work.  
 
PART 5
Provisions Regarding Doctoral Programs
 
Aim and scope
ARTICLE 38 – (1) The aim of a Ph.D. program is to equip students with the skills of doing independent research, interpreting scientific phenomena with broad and in-depth analysis and determining the necessary steps that will lead to new syntheses. The authentic thesis to be prepared following doctoral work must bear at least one of the qualities below:
a)  Introducing innovation to science by generating new knowledge.
b) Developing a new method of scientific research and applying this.
c) Developing a new application of a well-known method and applying this.
 
The duration of a Ph.D. program
ARTICLE 39 – (1) The normal duration of a Ph.D. program is eight academic semesters, excluding the period spent in the Academic Deficiency Program. The maximum duration of the Ph.D. program is twelve academic semesters. In Ph.D. on Bachelor’s degree programs, the normal duration is ten academic semesters, and the maximum duration is fourteen academic semesters.
(2) In Ph.D. programs, the maximum duration for the completion of credit courses and the seminar course is four academic semesters:
(3) In Ph.D. on Bachelor’s degree programs, the maximum duration for the completion of credit courses and the seminar course is six academic semesters.
(4) In cases where the jury deems necessary, students whose work is found unsatisfactory during their doctoral thesis defense may be granted an additional period of maximum six months to enable them to complete their thesis work.
 
Course loads and success in Ph.D. programs
ARTICLE 40 – (1) A Ph.D. program consists of the phases of at least seven credit courses with a cumulative total of twenty-one credits, one seminar course, the doctoral comprehensive examination, the thesis proposal, thesis work and the defense of the thesis before a jury, as well as a total of at least 240 ECTS-credits.
(2) The phases of Ph.D. on Bachelor’s degree programs consist of at least fourteen credit courses with a cumulative total of at least forty-two credits, one seminar course, the doctoral comprehensive examination, the thesis proposal, thesis work and the defense of the thesis before of a jury, as well as a total of at least 300 ECTS-credits
(3) As of the beginning of the semester following the assignment of the thesis supervisor, the student must register for the thesis work and the related courses each semester.
(4) Undergraduate courses taken in a doctoral program cannot be counted in the course load or towards doctoral credits.
(5) Of the graduate courses offered in other institutions of higher education, students in Ph.D. programs can select a maximum of two, and those in Ph.D. on Bachelor’s degree programs can select a maximum of four courses by recommendation of the GSD and with the approval of the concerned GSAB. 
If the courses taken are counted in the course load ofstudents in accordance with the decision of the Graduate School Administrative Committee, the grade of the relevant course is not included in the GPA of students and assigned as EX (exempt).
 
(6) Students who cannot successfully complete the courses (credit courses and seminar course) specified by the concerned GSD within four academic semesters in Ph.D. programs, and in six academic semesters in Ph.D. on Bachelor’s degree programs, and/or students whose Cumulative Grade Point Average is below 3.00 may not sit the doctoral comprehensive examination, and are dismissed from the programs they are enrolled in.
 
Ph.D. thesis supervisor
ARTICLE 41 – (1) The thesis supervisor is assigned by recommendation of the concerned GSD and approval of GSAB latest by the end of the second semester.
(2) The thesis supervisor is selected from METU members of faculty.
(3) In cases where the nature of the thesis work calls for more than one supervisor, a second supervisor may be assigned as co-supervisor by recommendation of the concerned GSD chair and approval of GSAB. The co-supervisor may be a faculty member from inside or outside the University holding at least a doctoral degree.
(4) Provisions concerning the assignment and replacement of a supervisor or a co-supervisor are determined by the concerned GSAB.
(5) In order to qualify as a thesis supervisor, the faculty member should have supervised at least one Master’s thesis which should have been successfully completed.
 
The doctoral comprehensive examination
ARTICLE 42 – (1) The doctoral comprehensive examination (DCE) is the assessment of the students’ knowledge of the basic subjects and concepts in their field, and of whether they possess the depth of scientific research related to doctoral work. 
(2) In order to be eligible to take the DCE, students should successfully complete the courses and the seminar course, and their Cumulative Grade Point Average should be at least 3.00. 
(3) A student may take the DCE twice the most.
(4) The DCE is administered twice a year, in May and November. The names of applicants for the DCE are submitted by the chair of the GSD to the concerned GS one month prior to the exam.
(5) Students in Ph.D. programs must take the DCE latest by the end of the fifth semester, and students in Ph.D. on Bachelor’s degree programs must take it latest by the end of the seventh semester.
(6) Comprehensive examinations are arranged and administered by a Doctoral Comprehensive Board of five faculty members from the concerned GSD who are assigned for a three-year term by recommendation of the chair of the GSD and approval of the concerned GSAB. The Board sets up examination juries in order to prepare exams in varied fields, and administer and evaluate these exams.  An examination jury comprises five members, at least two of whom are from outside the University and one of whom is the student’s thesis supervisor. The supervisor has a right to vote. The DCE meetings may be open to instructors, graduate students and experts in the field. However, the audience is asked to leave the room during the decision phase.
 (7) The DCE consists of written and oral examinations that will assess the students’ competence in the related field and their disposition towards research. The DCE is conducted in English in its entirety.
 (8) Students who succeed in the written examination take an oral examination. The exam format and weight, success criteria and the calculation of the exam grades are determined by the Doctoral Comprehensive Board. The jury decides, by absolute majority, whether a student is to be deemed “successful” or “unsuccessful” by evaluating the results of the written and oral components of the exam. The concerned GS is notified of this decision latest within three days in an official report approved by Doctoral Comprehensive Board.     
 (9) The DCE jury may require a student who is successful in the DCE to take a course / courses additional to those taken even if the course load requirements have been fulfilled. Upon approval by the Doctoral Comprehensive Board, the concerned GS is notified of these courses through the concerned GSD chair.The student must earn the letter grade BB minimum in the specified courses. These courses are taken in NI status and are not counted in the Cumulative Grade Point Average. A student who cannot successfully complete these courses within the maximum period may not defend her/his  thesis before a jury and is dismissed from the program.
 (10) Students who fail their first exam re-sit the exam in the ensuing semester. If a student is deemed unsuccessful once again, then she/he is dismissed from the program.
 (11) Students who fail to sit any phase of the DCE are considered to have exercised their right to take that exam and are deemed unsuccessful in that phase.
 
Doctoral thesis advisory committee (TAC)
ARTICLE 43 – (1) A TAC is assigned, within one month, to a student who is successful in the DCE by recommendation of the chair of the GSD and approval of the concerned GSAB so as to approve the student’s doctoral thesis proposal and to monitor the course of the thesis work in ensuing semesters.
(2) The TAC is composed of three faculty members. In addition to the thesis advisor, there are two other members in the committee, one from the GSD and the other from outside the GSD. In cases where a co-supervisor has been appointed, the co-supervisor may attend the meetings if he/she wishes.
(3) In ensuing semesters, TAC members may be replaced by recommendation of the chair of the GSD and approval of the concerned GSAB.
 
Defense of the thesis proposal and monitoring the course of the thesis work
ARTICLE 44 - (1) Within six months latest after the DCE, the student who is deemed successful defends orally and in English her/his thesis proposal which comprises the purpose of the thesis work, the research method and the future work plan before the TAC. The student submits a written report to the TAC members at least fifteen days prior to this meeting.
 (2) The TAC decides, with absolute majority, to “approve”, "return for revision" or “reject” the presented thesis proposal. One month is allotted for revision. At the end of this period, and by latest within three days after the defense of the thesis proposal, the chair of the GSD notifies, in an official report, the concerned GS of the final decision which is taken by absolute majority as "approval" or "refusal".
(3) Students whose thesis proposals are rejected have a right to choose another thesis topic or thesis supervisor, in which case a new TAC may be assigned. Students who choose to continue the program with the same thesis supervisor defend their proposal once again latest within the ensuing three months, and those who choose a different thesis topic and thesis supervisor do so latest within the ensuing six months. In case of rejection of the thesis proposal a second time, the student is dismissed from the program.
 (4) For the student whose thesis proposal has been approved, the TAC convenes twice a year, once between January and June and once between July and December. The student submits a written report to the TAC members at least one month before their meeting. In this report, a summary of the work covered thus far and the work plan for the next semester are given. The letter grade for the student’s thesis work is determined as (S) or (U) by the TAC. Students who receive the letter grade "U" twice consecutively, or three times intermittently, in their thesis work are deemed unsuccessful and dismissed from their programs. 
(5) A student who fails to attend the thesis proposal defense session without a valid excuse within the period stated in Article 1 of this Regulation is deemed unsuccessful and her/his thesis proposal is rejected.
(6) In order for the student's thesis to be finalized, at least three TAC reports should be presented. 
 
Preparation and finalization of a Doctoral thesis
ARTICLE 45 – (1) The Doctoral thesis comprises the phases of thesis work, and following this, its defense before a jury.
(2) Students should successfully complete their thesis work within their maximum duration. Students who fail to stand for the defense of their thesis before the maximum duration terminates are dismissed from their program.
 (3) The student whose thesis work has been approved as completed by the thesis supervisor must put her/his findings on paper in accordance with the principles indicated in the METU Thesis Manual. The regulations regarding the thesis defense are as follows:
a) Upon completing her/his thesis, the student submits a copy of it to her/his thesis supervisor, who checks it for plagiarism, prepares a plagiarism report, and together with it, sends a copy of the unbound thesis and the GSD approved jury-member appointment form to the concerned GS.
b) The latest date on which students may defend their thesis for each semester is indicated in the academic calendar.
c) The doctoral thesis jury is appointed with the approval of the concerned GSAB by recommendation of the thesis advisor and GSD chair. The committee is composed of five members of faculty including those in the TAC and at least two members from a different institutions of higher education. The thesis supervisor has a right to vote. In addition to the five members of the thesis jury, the co-supervisor may attend the meeting without a right to vote.
d) The jury members convene within one month as of the date they receive the thesis so as to have the student defend the thesis. The thesis defense, which must be conducted in English and shall comprise the presentation of the thesis work and a consecutive question and answer session, is open to an audience. The audience is asked to leave the room before the decision is announced.
e) The date and the place on which the thesis defense is to take place is announced on the official Internet page of the concerned GSD.
(4) After the thesis defense is completed, the jury decides in the absence of the audience and in absolute majority, whether the result is “approval”, “revision” or “rejection”. The decision of the jury is sent to the concerned GS by the chair of the GSD with the official jury report latest within three days of the defense. Students who are unsuccessful and whose theses are rejected are dismissed from their program.
(5) Students who are asked to review their theses after the defense may be given an extension of maximum six months by the jury. The student makes the required revisions and defends the thesis once again before the same jury. Students who fail to stand before the jury for a defense before this period expires, or whose thesis is not approved after this defense are dismissed from their program.
(6) The student found successful in her/his thesis defense must submit to the concerned GS, at least three bound copies of the thesis found appropriate as per format by the concerned GS, along with the plagiarism report, within one month as of the date of the defense. Upon request, the student may be given an extension of maximum one month for the submission of the thesis by the chair of the concerned GS. Students who fail to meet these requirements cannot receive their diplomas or exercise rights granted to students until they do so, and are dismissed from their programs if the maximum duration expires.   
(7) A student whose official jury report has been submitted to the RO after being signed by the concerned GS director is entitled to a Doctoral degree.
(8)Students in Ph.D on Bachelor’s degree programs or those who have graduated from a Master’s degree program with a thesis but carry out Ph.D studies in a different department of the Graduate School and who fail to complete their credit courses and/or thesis studies within the maximum duration or whose PhD thesis has been rejected by the jury are given an additional semester to fulfill the requirements of the course load, project load, etc of the non-thesis Master’s degree program, if they request and the department of the Graduate School they are enrolled in for Ph.D has a regular non-thesis Master’s degree program. At the end of this period, the students who have duly fulfilled the requirements of the non-thesis Master’s degree program, such as course load and project load, are granted a non-thesis Master’s degree diploma.  Students who are deemed unsuccessful at the end of that period are dismissed from the program.
 
 
PART 6
Diplomas and Documents, Academic Advisors, Disciplinary Procedures, Student Grants, Health Services, Tuitions and Other Fees, Leaves of Absence, Withdrawal of Registration and Student Notifications
 
Diplomas and documents
ARTICLE 46 – (1) Diplomas, certificates awarded and other documents issued to students and graduates, and the provisions regarding the issuance of these are as follows:
a) Master’s with a Thesis Diploma: This diploma is awarded to those who meet the graduation requirements of a Master’s program with a thesis.
b) Master’s without a Thesis Diploma: This diploma is awarded to those who meet the graduation requirements of a Master’s program without a thesis.
c) Ph.D. Diploma: This diploma is awarded to those who meet the graduation requirements of a Doctoral program or a Ph.D. on Bachelor’s degree program.
d) Provisional Certificate of Graduation: This document is issued only once as a substitute for a diploma to students who are deemed eligible for graduation, and it is valid until the date of the commencement ceremony of the concerned academic year.
e) Diploma Supplement: This is a document which accompanies diplomas and aims at the international recognition of the academic and professional competences of their holders. 
d) Transcript: This document is a complete official record of the courses taken each semester, their credits values and the grades earned, the grade point averages for the concerned semesters, the cumulative grade point averages and the standing of a student starting from the student’s admission to the university.
e) Student Certificate: This is a document which shows the University registration status of a student.
(2) Diplomas, certificates and other such documents are signed by the below-mentioned authorities:
a) Diplomas are signed by the President, the concerned GS director and the chair of the GSD.
b) Provisional certificate of graduation is signed by the concerned GS director, the chair of the GSD and authorized RO staff.
c) The diploma supplement, transcript and student certificate are signed by authorized RO staff.
(3) The names of the GS, the GSD, and/or if applicable, the program the student is enrolled in are indicated on diplomas and documents.
(4) The format, size and information to be written on diplomas are specified by the Senate.
(5) In the event of the loss of a diploma, a replacement copy is issued, once only. The replacement copy bears the notation “second copy”.
(6) In the event of a change in the name and/or surname of the graduate after the graduation date, replacement copies of diplomas and/or certificates are not issued, nor is the information on them changed.
 
Academic advisors
ARTICLE 47 – (1) Chairs of each GSD assign an academic advisor from among full-time faculty to each student admitted to a graduate program. Once the thesis supervisor is assigned, she/he also performs the function of an academic advisor.
(2) The duties/responsibilities of the academic advisors are stated below:
a) They inform students about the courses they are to take each semester and provide guidance in choosing them.
b) They approve semester registrations after evaluating the courses to be taken with the student according to her/his academic standing.
c) They provide information and guidance to the student in adapting to university life, professional development and career choices.
 
Disciplinary procedures
ARTICLE 48 – (1) The disciplinary procedures regarding students are carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Rules and Regulations Governing the Disciplinary Procedures in Institutions of Higher Education.
 
Student grants
ARTICLE 49 – (1) The provisions governing the distribution of student grants and aids obtained from various sources are determined by the Senate.
 
Health services
ARTICLE 50 – (1) The provisions governing the health services offered to students are determined by the Senate.
 
Tuition and other fees
ARTICLE 51 – (1) Tuitions, education fees and other fees are determined by the University Administrative Board within the framework of the Council of Ministers decree.
 
Leaves of absence
ARTICLE 52 – (1) Students may be granted a leave of absence from the University for a maximum period of two semesters with the decision of the concerned GSAB based on obligations related to health, military service, education in an institution of higher education in Turkey or abroad, or financial and familial obligations. In obligatory cases, this period can be extended by the concerned GSAB.
(2) Students who wish to be granted a leave of absence must apply to the concerned GSD chair with a petition stating valid grounds for the request and the necessary documents latest by the end of the add-drop week of the related semester. The GSD chair submits the student’s leave of absence request to the concerned GSAB along with the views of both student’s academic advisor/thesis supervisor and the GSD chair. Excluding unexpected circumstances, applications made after the add-drop week are not processed.   
(3) The decision of the concerned GSAB is sent to the RO, which processes the decision and notifies the student and the concerned academic and administrative units.
(4) The academic status of the students whose leave periods have ended may register for the new semester on the dates stated in the academic calendar. 
(5) Students who wish to return to University earlier than the termination of the leave period must apply with a petition to the concerned GSD chair before interactive registrations start. After the application is evaluated by the student’s academic advisor/thesis supervisor, the GSD chair and the GS directorate, it is sent to the RO. The status of the student is evaluated within the framework of the related articles in this Regulation. Students who meet the registration requirements may register for the new semester on the dates stated in the academic calendar.
 
Withdrawal of registration
ARTICLE 53 – (1) Students who wish so may withdraw their registration through the Student Affairs Information System.
 (2) Students who withdraw their registration or are dismissed on grounds of disciplinary action must follow the procedures for registration withdrawal specified by the University and fulfill their financial obligations in order that they may receive their diplomas or their personal documents in the RO files.
(3) Students who have withdrawn their registration but wish to return to University may re-apply to the related program. This application is evaluated by the concerned GSD chair within the framework of the provisions for application and admission to programs.
 
Notifications
ARTICLE 54 – (1) All types of notification to students are sent to their postal address in the students’ official records or to the e-mail addresses provided to them by the University. 
(2) Students are obliged to follow the messages sent to their e-mail addresses provided by the University.
 
PART 7
Miscellaneous and Final Provisions
 
Northern Cyprus Campus
ARTICLE 55 – (1) The procedures and principles regarding the implementation of these rules and regulations to the graduate programs carried out at the Northern Cyprus Campus are determined by the Senate.
 
Invalidated regulation
ARTICLE 56 – (1) The regulation entitled Middle East Technical University Rules and Regulations Governing Undergraduate Studies published in the Official Gazette no. 28907 dated February 08, 2014 has been invalidated. 
 
Articles Governing the Transition Period
TRANSITORY ARTICLE 1– (1) The implementation of the new provisions introduced by this Regulation and the specified periods in it shall be valid as of the 2016-2017 Academic Year Fall Semester.
(2)  Students in Master's programs whose theses were refused by the thesis examination jury in the 2015-2016 Academic Year Spring Semester, who were given an extension, and/or whose theses were not approved before the extension period expired may be given, for once only, an extension of two academic semesters. Doctoral students in the same status may be granted an extension of four academic semesters.
(3) The provision included in the Higher Education Council's Academic Rules and Regulations Governing Graduate Studies, stating that students who apply to the Ph.D. on Bachelor’s degree programs must earn a minimum ALES score announced by the concerned GSD providing it is no less than 80 according to the score type/category of the programs, shall be valid as of the application dates for the 2016-2017 Academic Year Spring Semester. 
 
Validity
ARTICLE 57 – (1) This regulation is effective as of the date of its publication.
 
Implementation
ARTICLE 58– (1) The provisions of this regulation are implemented by the President of Middle East Technical University.  

